# Ubiquity releasing

This document details the steps to create a release for
`ubiquity` aka UbiQ.

## Before making a release

Things you should do before making a release:

- Check the
  [Ubiquity release process](releasing.md)
  for high-level process and possible follow-up actions
- Uplift controller Go modules to use latest corresponding modules
- Uplift any other direct/indirect dependency to close any public
  vulnerabilities

## Permissions

Creating a release requires repository `write` permissions for:

- Tag pushing
- GitHub Release publishing

These permissions are implicit for the org admins and repository admins.
This GitHub team has the required permissions in each repository
required to release Ubiquity. Adding person to the team gives him/her the necessary
rights in all relevant repositories in the organisation. Individual persons
should not be given permissions directly.

## Process

Ubiquity uses [semantic versioning](https://semver.org).

### Repository setup

Clone the repository:
`git clone git@github.com:logicalisuki/ubiquity-open`

or if using existing repository, verify your intended remote is set to
`ubiquity`: `git remote -v`. For this document, we assume it is `origin`.

### Tags

Ubiquity does not have release branches. Release is created by tagging a commit off
the main branch. First we create a primary release tag, that triggers release
note creation and image building processes.

- Create a signed, annotated tag with: `git tag -s -a v0.x.y -m v0.x.y`
- Push the tags to the GitHub repository: `git push origin v0.x.y`

This triggers two things:

- GitHub action workflow for automated release process creates a draft release
  in GitHub repository with correct content, comparing the pushed tag to
  previous tag
- Quay starts building release image for opus with the release tag

We also need to create one or more tags for the Go modules ecosystem:

- For any subdirectory with `go.mod` in it (excluding `hack/tools`), create
  another Git tag with directory prefix, ie.
  `git tag -s api/v0.x.y -m api/v0.x.y`.
  **NOTE**: Do not create annotated tags for go modules.

### Release artifacts

We need to verify all release artifacts are correctly built or generated by
the release workflow. For a release, we should have the following artifacts:

Git tags pushed:

- Primary release tag: `v0.x.y`
- Go module tags: `api/v0.x.y` and `pkg/hardwareutils/v0.x.y`

Container images built and tagged at Quay registry:

- [ubiquity-opus:v0.x.y](https://quay.io/repository/logicalis/ubiquity-opus?tab=tags)

Ubiquity release in GitHub will only contain source code as artifact.

### Release notes

Next step is to clean up the release note manually.

- Check for duplicates, reverts, and incorrect classifications of PRs, and
  whatever release creation tagged to be manually checked.
- For any superseded PRs (like same dependency uplifted multiple times, or
  commit revertions) that provide no value to the release, create a summary
  line in `Superseded` section with the PR ids and summary title. This way the
  changes are acknowledged to be part of the release, but not overwhelming the
  important changes contained by the release.
- If the release you're making is not a new major release, new minor release,
  or a new patch release from the latest release branch, uncheck the box for
  latest release.
- If it is a release candidate (RC) or a pre-release, tick pre-release box.
- Publish the release.